---
title: "Estimation"
bg: dark-blue
color: light-yellow
fa-icon: bullseye
---

Knowing how fast things grow and coming up with quick and crude useful estimates is extremely useful in Olympiad problems in number theory, algebra and combinatorics. Knowing how to estimate is also useful in geometry but we will not be exploring that thread too much.  The goal here is to not find the most accurate estimate of a particular quantity or describe it perfectly. The goal is to find good estimates that are easy to use. In combinatorics, it can come up as knowing what is the most relevant quantity that we care about and what is less important. For the computational problems, section, check out "Newton iteration method".

The pset is divided into two parts: 
1. **Olympiad problems** [**pdf**](pdfs\guesstimation\oly.pdf)        [**tex**](pdfs\guesstimation\oly.tex) (Since there's no reading material, there are a few more problems here than usual) 
   **Solutions** [**pdf**](_posts\2023-01-04-Size.md
pdfs\guesstimation\oly-soln.pdf)    [**tex**](_posts\2023-01-04-Size.md
pdfs\guesstimation\oly-soln.tex)
2. **Computational problems** [**pdf**](pdfs\guesstimation\comp.pdf)      [**tex**](pdfs\guesstimation\comp.tex)

Don't worry if you are finding it harder than other psets. It is that way by design.

Some fun resources for practicing guesstimation are:
1. Guesstimation: Solving the World's Problems on the Back of a Cocktail Napkin by Weinstein and Adam
2. Guesstimation 2.0: Solving Today's Problems on the back Back of Napkin by Lawrence Weinstein

Some possible (optional) resources:
- [Princeton Asymptotic Approximation](https://aofa.cs.princeton.edu/40asymptotic/)
- [MIT Sums and Asymptotics](https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/6-042j-mathematics-for-computer-science-fall-2010/c110f2c1483fd57a9c97ebde0be38f75_MIT6_042JF10_chap09.pdf) and some basics can also be found on 
- Wikipedia: [big O notation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Big_O_notation), [Master Theorem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Master_theorem_(analysis_of_algorithms)) and whatever else you want
- [Density and Complexity](https://ericshen.net/handouts/ZN-density.pdf), a short, concise handout on use of density based arguments in NT.
- [Intro to Newton Iteration](https://math.mit.edu/~stevenj/18.335/newton-sqrt.pdf), a mini example of newton iteration for estimating square roots

The class will also be divided into two parts:
1. **Group-solving** (like all other sessions I will have)
2. **Quiz show** (we will have a short jeopardy style guesstimation/size quiz and all are invited!)